---
layout: paper
title: "Comprehensive analysis of mammalian miRNA* species and their role in myeloid cells."
image: /assets/images/papers/21628414.jpg
authors: Florian Kuchenbauer, Sarah M Mah, Michael Heuser, Andrew McPherson, Jens Rüschmann, Arefeh Rouhi, Tobias Berg, Lars Bullinger, Bob Argiropoulos, Ryan D Morin, David Lai, Daniel T Starczynowski, Aly Karsan, Connie J Eaves, Akira Watahiki, Yuzhuo Wang, Samuel A Aparicio, Arnold Ganser, Jürgen Krauter, Hartmut Döhner, Konstanze Döhner, Marco A Marra, Fernando D Camargo, Lars Palmqvist, Christian Buske, R Keith Humphries
ref: Kuchenbauer et al. 2011. Blood.
journal: "Blood <b>118</b>, 3350-8 (2011)"
doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312454
abbrev: "Blood <b>118</b>, 3350-8 (2011)"
pub_year: 2011
---

<br />
<div data-badge-popover="right" data-badge-type="donut" data-pmid="21628414" data-hide-no-mentions="true" class="altmetric-embed"></div>

# Abstract

Processing of pre-miRNA through Dicer1 generates an miRNA duplex that consists of an miRNA and miRNA* strand. Despite the general view that miRNA*s have no functional role, we further investigated miRNA* species in 10 deep-sequencing libraries from mouse and human tissue. Comparisons of miRNA/miRNA* ratios across the miRNA sequence libraries revealed that 50% of the investigated miRNA duplexes exhibited a highly dominant strand. Conversely, 10% of miRNA duplexes showed a comparable expression of both strands, whereas the remaining 40% exhibited variable ratios across the examined libraries, as exemplified by miR-223/miR-223* in murine and human cell lines. Functional analyses revealed a regulatory role for miR-223* in myeloid progenitor cells, which implies an active role for both arms of the miR-223 duplex. This was further underscored by the demonstration that miR-223 and miR-223* targeted the insulin-like growth factor 1 receptor/phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase axis and that high miR-223* levels were associated with increased overall survival in patients with acute myeloid leukemia. Thus, we found a supporting role for miR-223* in differentiating myeloid cells in normal and leukemic cell states. The fact that the miR-223 duplex acts through both arms extends the complexity of miRNA-directed gene regulation of this myeloid key miRNA.

