---
layout: paper
title: "A novel SND1-BRAF fusion confers resistance to c-Met inhibitor PF-04217903 in GTL16 cells through [corrected] MAPK activation."
image: /assets/images/papers/22745804.jpg
authors: Nathan V Lee, Maruja E Lira, Adam Pavlicek, Jingjing Ye, Dana Buckman, Shubha Bagrodia, Sreesha P Srinivasa, Yongjun Zhao, Samuel Aparicio, Paul A Rejto, James G Christensen, Keith A Ching
ref: Lee et al. 2012. PLoS One.
journal: "PloS one <b>7</b>, e39653 (2012)"
pdf: /assets/pdfs/papers/22745804.pdf
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039653
abbrev: "PLoS One <b>7</b>, e39653 (2012)"
pub_year: 2012
---

<br />
<div data-badge-popover="right" data-badge-type="donut" data-pmid="22745804" data-hide-no-mentions="true" class="altmetric-embed"></div>

# Abstract

Targeting cancers with amplified or abnormally activated c-Met (hepatocyte growth factor receptor) may have therapeutic benefit based on nonclinical and emerging clinical findings. However, the eventual emergence of drug resistant tumors motivates the pre-emptive identification of potential mechanisms of clinical resistance. We rendered a MET amplified gastric cancer cell line, GTL16, resistant to c-Met inhibition with prolonged exposure to a c-Met inhibitor, PF-04217903 (METi). Characterization of surviving cells identified an amplified chromosomal rearrangement between 7q32 and 7q34 which overexpresses a constitutively active SND1-BRAF fusion protein. In the resistant clones, hyperactivation of the downstream MAPK pathway via SND1-BRAF conferred resistance to c-Met receptor tyrosine kinase inhibition. Combination treatment with METi and a RAF inhibitor, PF-04880594 (RAFi) inhibited ERK activation and circumvented resistance to either single agent. Alternatively, treatment with a MEK inhibitor, PD-0325901 (MEKi) alone effectively blocked ERK phosphorylation and inhibited cell growth. Our results suggest that combination of a c-Met tyrosine kinase inhibitor with a BRAF or a MEK inhibitor may be effective in treating resistant tumors that use activated BRAF to escape suppression of c-Met signaling.

