---
layout: paper
title: "The genomic and transcriptomic architecture of 2,000 breast tumours reveals novel subgroups."
image: /assets/images/papers/22522925.png
authors: Christina Curtis, Sohrab P Shah, Suet-Feung Chin, Gulisa Turashvili, Oscar M Rueda, Mark J Dunning, Doug Speed, Andy G Lynch, Shamith Samarajiwa, Yinyin Yuan, Stefan Gräf, Gavin Ha, Gholamreza Haffari, Ali Bashashati, Roslin Russell, Steven McKinney,  , Anita Langerød, Andrew Green, Elena Provenzano, Gordon Wishart, Sarah Pinder, Peter Watson, Florian Markowetz, Leigh Murphy, Ian Ellis, Arnie Purushotham, Anne-Lise Børresen-Dale, James D Brenton, Simon Tavaré, Carlos Caldas, Samuel Aparicio
ref: Curtis et al. 2012. Nature.
journal: "Nature <b>486</b>, 346-52 (2012)"
pdf: /assets/pdfs/papers/22522925.pdf
doi: 10.1038/nature10983
abbrev: "Nature <b>486</b>, 346-52 (2012)"
year: 2012
---

<div data-badge-popover="right" data-badge-type="medium-donut" data-doi="10.1038/nature10983" data-hide-no-mentions="true" class="altmetric-embed"></div>

# Abstract

The elucidation of breast cancer subgroups and their molecular drivers requires integrated views of the genome and transcriptome from representative numbers of patients. We present an integrated analysis of copy number and gene expression in a discovery and validation set of 997 and 995 primary breast tumours, respectively, with long-term clinical follow-up. Inherited variants (copy number variants and single nucleotide polymorphisms) and acquired somatic copy number aberrations (CNAs) were associated with expression in ~40% of genes, with the landscape dominated by cis- and trans-acting CNAs. By delineating expression outlier genes driven in cis by CNAs, we identified putative cancer genes, including deletions in PPP2R2A, MTAP and MAP2K4. Unsupervised analysis of paired DNA–RNA profiles revealed novel subgroups with distinct clinical outcomes, which reproduced in the validation cohort. These include a high-risk, oestrogen-receptor-positive 11q13/14 cis-acting subgroup and a favourable prognosis subgroup devoid of CNAs. Trans-acting aberration hotspots were found to modulate subgroup-specific gene networks, including a TCR deletion-mediated adaptive immune response in the ‘CNA-devoid’ subgroup and a basal-specific chromosome 5 deletion-associated mitotic network. Our results provide a novel molecular stratification of the breast cancer population, derived from the impact of somatic CNAs on the transcriptome.

