---
layout: paper
title: "Cell of origin of transformed follicular lymphoma."
image: /assets/images/papers/26307535.png
authors: Robert Kridel, Anja Mottok, Pedro Farinha, Susana Ben-Neriah, Daisuke Ennishi, Yvonne Zheng, Elizabeth A Chavez, Hennady P Shulha, King Tan, Fong Chun Chan, Merrill Boyle, Barbara Meissner, Adele Telenius, Laurie H Sehn, Marco A Marra, Sohrab P Shah, Christian Steidl, Joseph M Connors, David W Scott, Randy D Gascoyne
ref: Kridel et al. 2015. Blood.
journal: "Blood <b>126</b>, 2118-27 (2015)"
pdf: /assets/pdfs/papers/26307535.pdf
doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-06-649905
abbrev: "Blood <b>126</b>, 2118-27 (2015)"
year: 2015
---

# Abstract

Follicular lymphoma (FL) is an indolent disease but transforms in 2% to 3% of patients per year into aggressive, large cell lymphoma, a critical event in the course of the disease associated with increased lymphoma-related mortality. Early transformation cannot be accurately predicted at the time of FL diagnosis and the biology of transformed FL (TFL) is poorly understood. Here, we assembled a cohort of 126 diagnostic FL specimens including 40 patients experiencing transformation (<5 years) and 86 patients not experiencing transformation for at least 5 years. In addition, we assembled an overlapping cohort of 155 TFL patients, including 114 cases for which paired samples were available, and assessed temporal changes of routinely available biomarkers, outcome after transformation, as well as molecular subtypes of TFL. We report that the expression of IRF4 is an independent predictor of early transformation (Hazard ratio, 13.3; P < .001). We also show that composite histology at the time of transformation predicts favorable prognosis. Moreover, applying the Lymph2Cx digital gene expression assay for diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell-of-origin determination to 110 patients with DLBCL-like TFL, we demonstrate that TFL is of the germinal-center B-cell-like subtype in the majority of cases (80%) but that a significant proportion of cases is of the activated B-cell-like (ABC) subtype (16%). These latter cases are commonly negative for BCL2 translocation and arise preferentially from BCL2 translocation-negative and/or IRF4-expressing FLs. Our study demonstrates the existence of molecular heterogeneity in TFL as well as its relationship to the antecedent FL.

