---
layout: paper
title: "Genetic profiling of MYC and BCL2 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma determines cell-of-origin-specific clinical impact."
image: /assets/images/papers/28351934.jpg
authors: Daisuke Ennishi, Anja Mottok, Susana Ben-Neriah, Hennady P Shulha, Pedro Farinha, Fong Chun Chan, Barbara Meissner, Merrill Boyle, Christoffer Hother, Robert Kridel, Daniel Lai, Saeed Saberi, Ali Bashashati, Sohrab P Shah, Ryan D Morin, Marco A Marra, Kerry J Savage, Laurie H Sehn, Christian Steidl, Joseph M Connors, Randy D Gascoyne, David W Scott
ref: Ennishi et al. 2017. Blood.
journal: "Blood <b>129</b>, 2760-2770 (2017)"
pdf: /assets/pdfs/papers/28351934.pdf
doi: 10.1182/blood-2016-11-747022
abbrev: "Blood <b>129</b>, 2760-2770 (2017)"
pub_year: 2017
---

<br />
<div data-badge-popover="right" data-badge-type="donut" data-pmid="28351934" data-hide-no-mentions="true" class="altmetric-embed"></div>

# Abstract

The clinical significance of MYC and BCL2 genetic alterations in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), apart from translocations, has not been comprehensively investigated using high-resolution genetic assays. In this study, we profiled MYC and BCL2 genetic alterations using next-generation sequencing and high-resolution SNP array in 347 de novo DLBCL cases treated with R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) at the British Columbia Cancer Agency. Cell-of-origin (COO) subtype was determined by Lymph2Cx digital gene expression profiling. We showed that the incidence of MYC/BCL2 genetic alterations and their clinical significance were largely dependent on COO subtypes. It is noteworthy that the presence of BCL2 gain/amplification is significantly associated with poor outcome in activated B-cell-like and BCL2 translocation with poor outcome in germinal center B-cell subtypes, respectively. Both have prognostic significance independent of MYC/BCL2 dual expression and the International Prognostic Index (IPI). Furthermore, the combination of BCL2 genetic alterations with IPI identifies markedly worse prognostic groups within individual COO subtypes. Thus, high-resolution genomic assays identify extremely poor prognostic groups within each COO subtype on the basis of BCL2 genetic status in this large, uniformly R-CHOP-treated population-based cohort of DLBCL. These results suggest COO subtype-specific biomarkers based on BCL2 genetic alterations can be used to risk-stratify patients with DLBCL treated with immunochemotherapy.

