---
layout: paper
title: "Identification of a selective DDX3X inhibitor with newly developed quantitative high-throughput RNA helicase assays."
image: /assets/images/papers/31954521.jpg
authors: Shoichi Nakao, Masahiro Nogami, Misa Iwatani, Toshihiro Imaeda, Masahiro Ito, Toshio Tanaka, Michiko Tawada, Satoshi Endo, Douglas R Cary, Momoko Ohori, Yasuhiro Imaeda, Tomohiro Kawamoto, Samuel Aparicio, Atsushi Nakanishi, Shinsuke Araki
ref: Nakao et al. 2020. Biochem Biophys Res Commun.
journal: "Biochemical and biophysical research communications <b>523</b>, 795-801 (2020)"
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2019.12.094
abbrev: "Biochem Biophys Res Commun <b>523</b>, 795-801 (2020)"
pub_year: 2020
---

<br />
<div data-badge-popover="right" data-badge-type="donut" data-pmid="31954521" data-hide-no-mentions="true" class="altmetric-embed"></div>

# Abstract

The DEAD-box family of RNA helicases plays essential roles in both transcriptional and translational mRNA degradation; they unwind short double-stranded RNA by breaking the RNA-RNA interactions. Two DEAD-box RNA helicases, eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4A3 (eIF4A3) and DEAD-box helicase 3 (DDX3X), show high homology in the ATP-binding region and are considered key molecules for cancer progression. Several small molecules that target eIF4A3 and DDX3X have been reported to inhibit cancer cell growth; however, more potent compounds are required for cancer therapeutics, and there is a critical need for high-throughput assays to screen for RNA helicase inhibitors. In this study, we developed novel fluorescence resonance energy transfer-based high-throughput RNA helicase assays for eIF4A3 and DDX3X. Using these assays, we identified several eIF4A3 allosteric inhibitors whose inhibitory effect on eIF4A3 ATPase showed a strong correlation with inhibitory effect on helicase activity. From 102 compounds that exhibited eIF4A3 ATPase inhibition, we identified a selective DDX3X inhibitor, C1, which showed stronger inhibition of DDX3X than of eIF4A3. Small-molecule helicase inhibitors can be valuable for clarifying the molecular machinery of DEAD-box RNA helicases. The high-throughput quantitative assays established here should facilitate the evaluation of the helicase inhibitory activity of compounds.

